+++
title = "Banking in the Soviet Union"
date = "2025-12-29"
tags = ["economics","finance", "ussr", "communism"]
summary = "There is perhaps no industry more quintessentially capitalist than banking. Bankers are widely derided by communists as a useless appendage of society, perpetuating and profiting from the corrupt capitalist system. However, while Marx envisioned a moneyless society, it is true that socialist states in the 20th century never quite achieved their utopian vision of a post-money world. So, I wondered what banking would look like in a socialist state, such as the U.S.S.R."
+++

*I took most of the evidence for this post from the monograph* Money, Financial Flows, and Credit in the Soviet Union *by George Garvy (National Bureau of Economic Research, 1977). Please see the original if you want a fuller look on this subject.*

* * *
\
There is perhaps no industry more quintessentially capitalist than banking. Bankers are widely derided by communists as a useless appendage of society, perpetuating and profiting from the corrupt capitalist system. However, while Marx envisioned a moneyless society, it is true that socialist states in the 20th century never quite achieved their utopian vision of a post-money world. So, I wondered what banking would look like in a socialist state, such as the U.S.S.R. Would it's role be perfunctory and unimportant, relegated to the background of the society? Lenin had this to say on the role of banking in a socialist state:

> *Without big banks socialism would be impossible*.
> 
> The big banks *are* the "state apparatus" which we *need* to bring about socialism, and which we *take ready-made* from capitalism; our task here is merely to lop off what *capitalistically mutilates* this excellent apparatus, to make it *even bigger*, even more democratic, even more comprehensive. Quantity will be transformed into quality. A single State Bank, the biggest of the big, with branches in every rural district, in every factory, will constitute as much as nine-tenths of the *socialist* apparatus. This will be country wide *book-keeping*, country-wide *accounting* of the production and distribution of goods, this will be, so to speak, some thing in the nature of the *skeleton* of socialist society. \[Italics in the original.\]

Wow, so Lenin was actually a big believer in banking. He believed that it was an "excellent apparatus," that he wanted to make it "even bigger" and that it would constitute 90% of socialism. Clearly, he had a vision for banking taking a big role in his post-revolutionary state. That said, what would banking look like in a socialist society, if instead of being a for-profit depository institution, it existed as the book-keeping and accounting backbone of a centrally planned economy? Certainly it is true that money [makes the world go round](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PIAXG_QcQNU), and if an entity could control the flows of money, it could direct economy activity absolutely. A single, government-run bank is the ideal way to do this. So, how did the Soviet state bank, Gosbank, arise, how was it run differently than a Western capitalist bank, and how does a radically different banking system function?

First, let's look at the historical circumstances that gave rise to Gosbank.

## Pre-Revolutionary Era

The seeds of the Soviet banking system lie in the Tsarist banking system. Like in the Soviet system that would appear years later, banking was highly centralized, with the Ministry of Finance closely administering a few state-run banks throughout the country. In the system that existed prior to 1866, this included "not more than a dozen banks," comprised of government ministers, who were sometimes relatives of the Tsar, and was directed by the Credit Administration of the Ministry of Finance. These banks supported programs deemed important by the government, from banking for the landed gentry of the country, to credit institutions for widows and orphans, to providing credit for some of the first industries, such as the "copper banks", which were particular to the needs of the Russian mining industry.

There were several unique aspects to this system. Obtaining a loan was not as much a matter of the person's creditworthiness, but rather, their ties to the Tsar and ability to procure favors. Often the state banks would act more as a provider of government subsidies, writing loans that would eventually be forgiven, than as a credit institution. They were used to promote the country's fledgling industries, like railroads, mining, and communications. The assets of government banks consisted of few customer deposits, and instead was made of seed money from the State Treasury, which often needed to be replenished on occasions of loss.

Around the time of the liberation of the serfs in 1861, there was significant reorganization of the financial system. The state banks were liquidated during the financial crisis of 1857-1859, and the State Bank of Imperial Russia was founded in 1860. There was a shift to commercial (i.e. for-profit) banking, with the first privately owned bank arising in 1866, though tightly bound by government oversight. From this, commercial banking rapidly developed in the fifty years prior to the 1917 revolution. For the first time, there was significant foreign capital invested in Russian banks. The new banking system was highly concentrated, with just twelve banks totaling 79% of all assets.

The Russian state still had a heavy hand in affairs of the banking industry up to the Communist Revolution, guaranteeing foreign loans to Russian businesses, propping up the ruble by making open market purchases of it with gold, and extending loans for large-scale industrial projects, like railroads. In 1897, Russia moved to the gold standard, making the State Bank a true central bank by virtue of being able to issue currency.

In 1875, the big commercial banks transitioned to "mixed banks" by engaging in what we call in modern parlance investment banking, partaking in underwriting securities (e.g. stocks and bonds). From a communist perspective, this led to many of negative consequences of developed financial markets, such as speculation and bubbles. The entry into mixed banking enabled the banks to take a leading role in directing the industrial development of Russia. Many of the corporations they invested in were either state owned or state backed. In addition to investing private capital, the banks facilitated grants from the state. After the depression caused by the Russo-Japanese War of 1905, the banks were resurgent in their investments, and in the years leading up to World War I, became the target of socialists who saw them as being "masters of industry."

## The Transition

On the day of the October Revolution in 1917, soldiers under direction of Lenin occupied the main branch of the State Bank in Petrograd. They did not want to repeat the mistakes of the Paris Commune, a short-lived communist revolt, which had allowed the privately owned Bank of France (also the country's monetary issuer) to persist, and had inhibited their efforts to control the economic apparatus. Therefore, they swiftly seized the State Bank as well as the commercial banks, hoping to control the cardiovascular system of the economy and entangle it inextricably with the new government. Bank employees, hoping to thwart the Bolshevik takeover, were paid three months advance salaries under the guidance to not cooperate with the new regime, believing that the revolution would soon be quelled. This boycott was effective initially — the bank was so disorganized that ordinary cash withdrawals were completely halted. The Bolsheviks, because of their lack of experience running a bank, did not utilize it effectively the first few months of the revolution, only plundering its reserves to fund their cause.

However, by the end of 1917 the State Bank resumed normal operations, including cash withdrawals, as well as some minimal lending and discounting activity. Subsequently, the newly-ruling Bolsheviks annointed the State Bank as the nominal authority over all commercial banks, as part of the people's assumption of all private corporations. In December 1917, the Soviets nationalized all commercial banks, cancelling all stockholders' stock, foreign and domestic. Armed soldiers were sent to occupy the headquarters of the commercial banks of Petrograd; they were then merged with the State Bank under the new name of the People's Bank (Norodny Bank). The bank of the cooperatives, the Moscow Norodny Bank, being socialist itself, was initially spared from the nationalization of the banks, but after a year of failed negotiations, was also nationalized and merged into the Soviet banking apparatus. The takeover of the banking system was complete.

## War Communism

In the years following the Bolshevik Revolution, from 1918 to 1921, the Russian Civil War embroiled the country in economic chaos. During this time, the policies of War Communism were enacted to drive the economy and enable the Communists to win the civil war. The economy was severely devestated. Foreign trade ceased. Hyperinflation followed due to the Treasury issuing great deals of Treasury Notes (*sovznaks* - Soviet tokens) in order to finance the war. Domestic goods were requisitioned by the Red Army in order to fuel the war machine. Because of the destruction of the basic functions of money, the economy became demonetized, with much trade taking place on a barter basis, with old Tsarist rubles, or ad-hoc money surrogates (2,181 according to one historian).

Due to the demonetized nature of the economy, the bank could no longer serve as the "skeleton of socialist society" as Lenin had hoped, and the objective shifted to rebuilding the economy under the directives of central planning, a complex and gigantic task. In January 1920, the People's Bank was liquidated, with its functions transferred to the authority of the People's Commissary (Ministry) of Finance. This was not just because of the breakdown of the moneyed economy, but also because some Soviet leaders believed that finance simply should not exist. C. S. Sokolnikov, People's Commissar of Finance said, "finance... should not exist in a socalist community." Lenin's vision for the bank seemed moribund: In 1921 he wrote, "Quite a lot was said about the State Bank in 1917 but ... it remained largely a dead letter."

## New Economic Plan and Monetary Reform

This bankless state of affairs was short-lived, ultimately, and in October 1921, in conjunction with the New Economic Plan (NEP), a new State Bank was created under the auspices of the Ministry of Finance. In 1923, the State Bank of Russia would be renamed the State Bank of the USSR (Gosudarstvennyi Bank - Gosbank). Monetary reform followed between 1922 and 1924, where in 1922, a new currency was introduced, the *chervonet.* The chervonet was backed by gold, unlike the sovznak, though the new currencies were theoretically convertible. The sovznak, being used by the agricultural economy, devalued greatly in comparison to the chervonet, used by the urban, industrial economy. This was in part due to the "scissor crisis" wherein agricultural products declined in price, while industrial products appreciated, leading to the currencies depreciating and appreciating, respectively (reminiscent of the shape of scissors when graphed). The old sovznak and new chervonet coexisted until 1924, when the sovznak was phased out entirely, and was repurchased by the government for chervonet, which became known as the "gold ruble," due to the return to the gold standard.

As part of the NEP, and enabled by the turn to a stable, gold-backed currency, new commercial banks in the form of joint-stock companies were created to provide both short and long-term credit. In 1921, Pokobank was established to provide credit to consumer cooperatives. This bank was expanded in scope to service all types of cooperatives, especially farms, in 1922, and renamed Vsekobank. The same year, the Russian Trade and Industrial Bank, or Prombank was established. The Russian Trade Bank was established in 1922 (renamed to Foreign Trade Bank of the USSR in 1924 - Vneshtorgbank). At the same time, the State Bank extended "daughter banks" internationally, in order to acquire foreign currency and bolster foreign trade. Two banks for agriculture were established, and some elements of the pre-revolutionary banking system were brought back, such as savings banks, municipal banks, and cooperative banks for small entrepreneurs. These banks created a multichannel system for reaching debtors, but somewhat overlapped with the State Bank when it came to providing credit. This began the era of the creation of many specialized banks. L. Kamenev, who was acting as head of the Council of People's Commissars after Lenin suffered a stroke, endorsed the view held by Lenin that banking was the bedrock of a socialist society, saying that centralized credit was "this commanding high that we have created out of practically nothing" and "the decisive factor in the regulation of the economy".

In 1924, the economic crisis was somewhat arrested, with inflation (for the moment) under control due to the introduction of a stable currency, the Soviet government having balanced its budget, and exports exceeding imports. However, the wreckage of the October Revolution and subsequent Civil War had left the Russian economy a shadow of its former self, with industrial production less than half of its pre-war (1913) level, and agricultural production barely two-thirds of what it was before.

The function of the State Bank evolved in the years from 1924 to the Credit Reforms of 1930-1932. In 1925, the State Bank was assigned the function of collecting taxes, eliminating the network of offices of the Ministry of Finance that were scattered about the country. All local governments' banks were assimilated into the central State Bank. In 1927, the role of the State Bank in relation to the commercial banks was defined by new legislation that made the State Bank the sole short-term lender, and eliminated redundancy with respect to what types of loans each was to give out. It also centralized all reporting, resources, and control.

## The Credit Reforms of 1930-1932

Building on the reorganization of 1927, in 1930, new credit reforms were enacted. Inter-enterprise lending was abolished, consolidating control of all credit with the Soviet banking system. It also separated the responsibilities of the various specialized banks and the State Bank, so that it was clear which bank would be in charge of which type of lending activity. The banks for long-term investment were separated into well-defined functions, of which there were four: Selkhozbank, Tsekombank, Prombank, and Vsekobank (the last of which would eventually be abolished), leaving all short-term lending to the State Bank. The local branches of the specialized banks were shuttered, and they were made to conduct their operations through branches of the State Bank.

In this form, the system would remain stable for most of the Soviet Union's history, with minor changes. In 1959, the specialized banks for long-term financing were merged into the single Investment Bank (Stroibank), leaving three main banks in the Soviet system: the State Bank, the Investment Bank, and the Bank for Foreign Trade (Vneshtorgbank). Many functions of the investment banks as well as municipal banks were assimilated by the State Bank. The State Savings Banks were incorporated into the State Bank in 1963. Until 1957, savings were automatically used to purchase government bonds, providing financing to the government. In 1965, while the banking structure remained intact, there was major economic reform geared towards improving the efficiency of the economy, which led to the banks financing more long-term capital investment with credit and expanding the State Bank's role.

## Aspects of Soviet Credit

To understand the role of credit in the Soviet economy, one must first understand the two disparate financial "circuits". That is, there were two forms of money in the Soviet economy: currency and deposits. Currency was what was held and spent by the public, while deposits were mainly used between enterprises. This bifurcation of money, which is a norm in socialist economies, ensured that there was no mixing of investment spending and consumption spending. Currency is spent by consumers at retail stores, while enterprises use deposit transfers to make payments among themselves. Conversion between deposits and currency would occur when payroll was sent out, making currency from deposits, or when people spent money at retail stores, which would make deposits from currency. Wages were set by the central administrators to provide for all household goods (which in turn had their prices set accordingly) and allocated a small amount for discretionary savings. In general, Soviet economic planners tended to limit savings to prevent pent-up spending sprees and keep demand fairly predictable.

Soviet credit was highly conservative and tightly controlled, which was exemplified by its five maxims: planned, specific, secured, repayable, and with a fixed maturity. As such, total loan volume was much less than what was found in Western nations. This kept lending relegated to specific "objects", where every loan had to be justified by the purpose it served to the enterprise. On the flip side, the bank did not evaluate the creditworthiness of an enterprise when it applied for a loan; it was more or less automatically approved, so long as its quota had not been met. The restrictive nature of credit in the Soviet Union was in large part due to the distrusting views towards credit in capitalistic societies. They believed that financial intermediaries served no useful role, and extracted "parasitic revenue" in the form of charging interest. Interest rates were thus driven not by credit risk or a desire for profit, but to cover expenses for the bank itself, as well as to penalize enterprises for overstocking with too-high loans. Also, in their view, capitalistic bankers also were responsible for overextending credit, causing speculative bubbles and crashes. Since the Soviet banking apparatus made loans only under direction of the central planners, this problem was solved by fiat, precluding the problem of bank runs that plague free market economies.

Lending to enterprises was employed virtually only for short-term financing. Longer term financing was appropriated through the unified central budget, which came to enterprises in the form of grants. This would be used to finance fixed capital that did not have a immediate or predictable payoff. This constitutes a substantial part of the Soviet budget, roughly 50% (since all investment spending is driven by the state in a socialist country, it makes sense this quantity would be a large proportion of the budget). After the reform of 1965, however, bank loans came to comprise a greater funding source of capital expenditure, as well as retained earnings (hitherto, profit had been kept low) and "depreciation credits," which were additional grants to maintain deteriorating capital equipment.

Short-term lending, on the other hand, was much more for-purpose and restrictive than you would find in non-socialist countries. It was used to satisfy working capital demands and fulfill payment obligations. Working capital is capital needed to address the business's immediate operations: the prime example being a manufacturer's inventory. Since the needed inventory is based on customers' demand, which is variable and fluctuates semi-randomly, it's necessary to borrow short-term for working capital to address sudden demand surges and eliminate the need to keep excess cash on hand to ensure adequate supply for these infrequent spikes. Soviet planners tried their best, but never fully succeeded, at supplying the correct quantities of goods to meet the forever changing preferences of the public. Within the Soviet Union, there was great internal debate over the correct proportion of working capital that should be financed through loans, rather than retained earnings, which were purposefully limited, since production, not profit, was the main goal of the enterprise director.

## Closing Thoughts

It strikes me as notable that, while Soviet academics tried to construct a society devoid of money, its use in their planned economy was inescapable. Classically, money has three roles in economics: as a unit of account, a store of value, and a medium of exchange. These uses were so powerful that even the best planning efforts could not abandon it entirely, as much as the planners would like to deal in purely physical terms. It's also notable how, in the socialist construct, each loan theoretically represented some quantity of real goods that were purchased with it. In a Western country, it is unthinkable that a bank would specify in such detail to an enterprise what a loan should be used for, except in vague terms or in pursuit of some high-level objective. Furthermore, while non-socialist countries perform monetary policy indirectly using tools like the discount rate or reserve requirement, Soviet policy makers set the level of circulating money directly.

So, did the Soviet Union succeed in achieving Lenin's vision for a socialist society with a singular bank at its helm? Probably not, at least in the grandiose way he envisioned it. The Soviet Union did indeed create a monobank, with branches in every city in all fifteen of its republics which domiciled all other banks. The State Bank also was instrumental in monitoring the performance of the entire economy, since all money flows moved through it. In this sense, his vision was achieved. However, instead of steering the economy, the bank was relegated to a mere implementary role, administering revenue from the state and overseeing enterprises' production targets by tracking their balances and transfers. The fact that much planning took place in committees outside of the State Bank, with production dictated in terms of real quantities of goods, rather than their money worth, calls into question how the bank could have taken a more central role.

While it succeeded in providing price stability over the course of its existence, the State Bank struggled to come up with the incentives to improve the performance of enterprises and fell short of its goals to unify the microeconomic view of a firm with the macroeconomic view of the economy and develop a comprehensive flow-of-accounts. Even though Lenin did not fully articulate his vision for the State Bank before his demise, one can wonder what he would have thought of the realized State Bank, how his vision of an all-important State Bank would have been different, and how the Soviet economy would have functioned under his alternate model.